#417 Added AdnMLNeuralTraining docs for Houdini (No standalone script) (#420)
Inbibo/adonisfx_docs: docs/houdini/tools/neural_training_tool.md

# AdnMLTraining TOP HDA

> [!IMPORTANT]
> An Adonis ML license is required to use this feature.

The **AdnMLTraining TOP HDA** is a TOPs wrapper around the Adonis neural training script. It provides a Houdini parameter interface to configure and launch the neural training process from a TOP graph.

The tool can be used to train an `.adnm` model from the input and output data generated by the ML data extraction workflow. It can also use neural cluster data when a neural cluster `.json` file has been prepared with the [AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool](../tools/neural_clustering_paint_tool).

The AdnMLTraining TOP HDA can help orchestrate the training process together with other TOP tasks, including data extraction when desired. Connected inputs are not strictly required, but they can be used to define TOP graph dependencies and data flow.

The AdnMLTraining TOP HDA can also help manage the training dependencies. If the required machine learning dependencies are missing when the TOP graph is launched, the tool prompts the user to install them. The dependencies can also be installed manually from **Adonis > Utils > *Install ML Dependencies***.

> [!NOTE]

> > When compatible GPU execution is available, training can use the GPU and is usually faster than CPU training. If GPU execution is not available, training falls back to CPU execution, which can be slower.

Reviewer: Requested change was not applied

```suggestion
> The training process checks automatically for an available Nvidia GPU and uses that to drastically accelerate training. If a supported GPU device is not available, training falls back to CPU execution, and will be significantly slower. Multi-GPU setups are currently not supported and the training will use the first available device
```

# AdnMLTraining TOP HDA

The **AdnMLTraining TOP HDA** is a TOPs wrapper around the Adonis neural training script. It provides a Houdini parameter interface to configure and launch the neural training process from a TOP graph.

The tool can be used to train an `.adnm` model from the input and output data generated by the ML data extraction workflow. It can also use neural cluster data when a neural cluster `.json` file has been prepared with the [AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool](../tools/neural_clustering_paint_tool).

The AdnMLTraining TOP HDA can help orchestrate the training process together with other TOP tasks, including data extraction when desired. Connected inputs are not strictly required, but they can be used to define TOP graph dependencies and data flow.

The AdnMLTraining TOP HDA can also help manage the training dependencies. If the required machine learning dependencies are missing when the TOP graph is launched, the tool prompts the user to install them. The dependencies can also be installed manually from **Adonis > Utils > *Install ML Dependencies***.

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer 2: move this to IMPORTANT at the top

Author: Done

- From the missing dependencies prompt shown when launching training.
- From **Adonis > Utils > *Install ML Dependencies***.
- By running `install_dependencies.bat` on Windows outside the DCC.
- By running `install_dependencies.sh` on Linux outside the DCC.

Installing the dependencies may take a few minutes.

> [!NOTE]
> When compatible GPU execution is available, training can use the GPU and is usually faster than CPU training. If GPU execution is not available, training falls back to CPU execution, which can be slower.

## Output Files

After a successful training run, the following files are generated:

- `<model_name>.adnm`: Trained Adonis neural model file.
- `<model_name>_log.txt`: Training log file generated next to the `.adnm` model.
- `<model_name>_config.json`: Configuration file storing the training parameters used for the run.

The `<model_name>_log.txt` file can be used to inspect the training process. It contains epoch information, average loss, best loss, warnings, errors, and other training messages.

The `<model_name>_config.json` file can be used to review the training configuration used to produce the model.

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: I would put this section after results

Reviewer 2: maybe at the end

Author: Done

- Use neural clusters when local deformation regions should be isolated during training.
- Use augmentation only when the dataset is small and training without augmentation is not producing good results. However, if possible, recording new data should always be considered first.
- Prefer GPU training when compatible hardware and dependencies are available, because it is usually faster than CPU training.
- Review the generated `<model_name>_log.txt` file after training to inspect epoch progress and loss values.
- Review the generated `<model_name>_config.json` file to confirm the training configuration used for the model.
- Use *Force Overwrite* carefully, because it deletes any existing model file at the target path.

## Limitations

- Augmentation is experimental and should only be used when there is no possibility of recording more data and training without augmentation is not giving good results.
- Augmented poses may contain artifacts and may be less aligned to the original simulated silhouette.
- Neural clusters with large and redundant overlapping regions can be detrimental for learning and lead to bad results.

> - Very small datasets may produce lower-quality models, especially when training complex deformations.

Reviewer 2: the last two are extra informative notes, not limitations in my opinion, but totally fine if you keep them

Author: Done
